---
title: Publications
layout: default
nav_order: 5
math: katex
description: publications based on felix
---

# Publications based on FeliX

The first version of FeliX was developed by *Rydzak et al. (2013)*. Rydzak et al. (2013) provided a conceptual description of the dynamic interactions and feedback loops of the model, and mathematical formulations. Based on FeliX, researchers have conducted scenario analyses on different global socio-economic and environmental problems. Specifically, Rydzak et al. (2013) simulated different scenarios under drought, biodiversity and forest themes compared to a “Business as Usual” scenario to explore interrelations in the complex Earth system, future development on technology (like carbon capture and storage), and human behavior changes. *Walsh et al. (2015)* narrated emissions pathways if microalgae was used as a feedstock for livestock and found that 1) up to 2 billion hectares of land currently used for pasture and feed crops could be freed, and 2) global atmospheric carbon concentrations could be reduced close to preindustrial levels using different climate mitigation measures. *Walsh et al. (2017)* projected energy and land-use emissions mitigation pathways through 2100 and found that, barring unforeseen and transformative technological advancement, anthropogenic emissions need to peak before 2025 to maintain realistic pathways to meeting the COP21 emissions and warming targets. 

*Eker et al. (2019)* extended the land use, food production and fertilizer modules of the model, and linked it to a behavioural diet shift model to explore the main drivers of global diet change and its implications for the food system. Eker et al. (2019) showed that the social norm effect (for instance, the extent of vegetarianism in the population that accelerates a further switch to a vegetarian diet) and self-efficacy are the main drivers of widespread dietary changes. *Moallemi et al. (2022b)* implemented the global change scenarios in FeliX to explore the impacts of model uncertainty and its structural complexity on the projection of sustainable development under these scenarios. Furthermore, *Moallemi et al. (2022a)* explored the drivers of progress of global Sustainable Development Goals and found that early planning for systems change into more sustainable pathways was important for accelerating the progress toward increasingly ambitious sustainable targets. *Liu et al. (2023)* assessed the effectiveness of different socioeconomic settings in eliminating poverty and quantified their impacts on the Earth system by 2050. More recently, an indicator for measuring human wellbeing, the global years of good life (YoGL) indicator, was estimated using FeliX and found to increase by on average about twice the rate by 2100 *(Kuhn et al., 2023)*. 

In summary, FeliX has facilitated vital research on global system dynamics, sustainability, and human well-being, and is poised for continued advancement for enhanced insights into key responses in human-earth systems.

## References
- Eker, S., Reese, G., Obersteiner, M., 2019. [Modelling the drivers of a widespread shift to sustainable diets](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41893-019-0331-1). *Nature Sustainability* 2, 725–735.
- Kuhn M, Eker S, Reiter C, & Liu Q. (2023). “Global systems analysis for understanding the drivers of sustainable wellbeing”. In Lutz W & Pachauri S (Eds.), [Systems Analysis for Sustainable Wellbeing. 50 years of IIASA research, 40 years after the Brundtland Commission, contributing to the post-2030 Global Agenda](https://iiasa.ac.at/sites/default/files/2023-09/IIASA%20Flagship%20Report.pdf) (pp. 61-76). IIASA.
- Liu, Q., Gao, L., Guo, Z., Dong, Y., Moallemi, E.A., Eker, S., Yang, J., Obersteiner, M., Bryan, B.A., 2023. [Robust strategies to end global poverty and reduce environmental pressures](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2023.03.007). *One Earth* 6, 392–408.
- Moallemi, E.A., Eker, S., Gao, L., Hadjikakou, M., Liu, Q., Kwakkel, J., Reed, P.M., Obersteiner, M., Guo, Z., Bryan, B.A., 2022a. [Early systems change necessary for catalyzing long-term sustainability in a post-2030 agenda](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2022.06.003). *One Earth* 5, 792–811. 
- Moallemi, E.A., Gao, L., Eker, S., Bryan, B.A., 2022b. [Diversifying models for analysing global change scenarios and sustainability pathways](https://doi.org/10.1017/sus.2022.7). *Global Sustainability*, 5, e7. 
- Rydzak, F., Obersteiner, M., Kraxner, F., Fritz, S., McCallum, I., 2013. [FeliX3–Impact Assessment Model: Systemic View across Societal Benefit Areas beyond Global Earth Observation](https://github.com/iiasa/Felix-Model/blob/master/Documentation/Felix3_ModelReport.pdf). International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), Laxenburg.
- Walsh, B., Ciais, P., Janssens, I.A., Peñuelas, J., Riahi, K., Rydzak, F., Van Vuuren, D.P., Obersteiner, M., 2017. [Pathways for balancing CO2 emissions and sinks](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms14856). *Nature Communications* 8, 14856. 
- Walsh, B.J., Rydzak, F., Palazzo, A., Kraxner, F., Herrero, M., Schenk, P.M., Ciais, P., Janssens, I.A., Peñuelas, J., Niederl-Schmidinger, A., Obersteiner, M., 2015. [New feed sources key to ambitious climate targets](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13021-015-0040-7
). *Carbon Balance Management* 10, 26. 
